CHAOS MASTERY

S E A M L E S S LY

F R O M B A BY LO N TO B O S TO N

Where It All Started
Before there were restaurants, hotels, or venues, there were
taverns — and before those, we felt obligated to feed and shelter
travelers. Hospitality did not begin with a business model. It

A N C I E N T H O S P I TA L I T Y L AW

Babylonian law imposed the death penalty on
tavern keepers who diluted beer — making good
customer service a matter of life and death.
Source: Star Tavern — "What is a Tavern?" startavern.net

began as a moral obligation.

The earliest recorded hospitality laws come from Babylon,
nearly 4,000 years ago. According to research compiled by Star

3

Tavern, Babylonian law — ordered the death penalty for

Ancient civilizations with documented
hospitality law: Babylon, Greece, Rome

vendors who diluted beer. It was a moral framework: the host's

HRC International, "History of the Hospitality Industry,"
hrc-international.com

obligation to the guest was sacred, and any violations was
treated accordingly.[1] startavern.net
In ancient Greece, this concept had a name: xenia — the sacred
law of hospitality. Hosts were expected to welcome strangers,

"

"Taverns and drinking establishments are

offer food and shelter, and refrain from asking where they came

almost as old as civilization itself. Some of the

from or the purpose of their visit; until after they had been fed.

earliest records of tavern keeping involve

According to HRC International's historical overview of the

Babylonian laws from nearly 4000 years ago."

industry, the Greeks dedicated spaces — the lesche, meaning a

STAR TAVERN

place for council or conversation, and the phatnai, which

startavern.net — "What Is a Tavern?"

provided spaces for locals, traders, diplomats, and public
officials.[7] hrc-international.com
The Roman twist: Early Roman taverns had a bad reputation;
and prominent men shunned them (in public). This did not stop
the upper classes — they entered in disguise. Outcasts and
troublemakers often filled these taverns, keeping them alive

Greek hospitality law (xenia): To refuse
shelter to a traveler was a religious offense in
ancient Greece. Being hospitable was a nonnegotiable — it was divine duty enforced by
Zeus himself in the role of Xenios, patron god
of guests.

with chaos. Even in ancient Rome, taverns drew everyone—
proving humans have always been drawn to a good meal and
lively company

1·2

CHAOS MASTERY — 4,000 YEARS OF HOSPITALITY LEADERSHIP

